# Sex differences in the genetic architecture of cognitive resilience to Alzheimer's disease.

### Abstract
Approximately 30% of elderly adults are cognitively unimpaired at time of death despite the presence of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology at autopsy. Studying individuals who are resilient to the cognitive consequences of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology may uncover novel therapeutic targets to treat Alzheimer's disease. It is well established that there are sex differences in response to Alzheimer's disease pathology, and growing evidence suggests that genetic factors may contribute to these differences. Taken together, we sought to elucidate sex-specific genetic drivers of resilience. We extended our recent large scale genomic analysis of resilience in which we harmonized cognitive data across four cohorts of cognitive ageing, in vivo amyloid PET across two cohorts, and autopsy measures of amyloid neuritic plaque burden across two cohorts. These data were leveraged to build robust, continuous resilience phenotypes. With these phenotypes, we performed sex-stratified [n<sub>(males)</sub> = 2,093, n<sub>(females)</sub> = 2,931] and sex-interaction [n<sub>(both_sexes)</sub>) = 5,024] genome-wide association studies (GWAS), gene and pathway-based tests, and genetic correlation analyses to clarify the variants, genes and molecular pathways that relate to resilience in a sex-specific manner. Estimated among cognitively normal individuals of both sexes, resilience was 20-25% heritable, and when estimated in either sex among cognitively normal individuals, resilience was 15-44% heritable. In our GWAS, we identified a female-specific locus on chromosome 10 [rs827389, β<sub>(females)</sub> = 0.08, P<sub>(females)</sub> = 5.76 × 10-09, β<sub>(males)</sub> = -0.01, P<sub>(males)</sub> = 0.70, β<sub>(interaction)</sub> = 0.09, P<sub>(interaction)</sub> = 1.01 × 10-04] in which the minor allele was associated with higher resilience scores among females. This locus is located within chromatin loops that interact with promoters of genes involved in RNA processing, including _GATA3_. Finally, our genetic correlation analyses revealed shared genetic architecture between resilience phenotypes and other complex traits, including a female-specific association with frontotemporal dementia and male-specific associations with heart rate variability traits. We also observed opposing associations between sexes for multiple sclerosis, such that more resilient females had a lower genetic susceptibility to multiple sclerosis, and more resilient males had a higher genetic susceptibility to multiple sclerosis. Overall, we identified sex differences in the genetic architecture of resilience, identified a female-specific resilience locus and highlighted numerous sex-specific molecular pathways that may underly resilience to Alzheimer's disease pathology. This study illustrates the need to conduct sex-aware genomic analyses to identify novel targets that are unidentified in sex-agnostic models. Our findings support the theory that the most successful treatment for an individual with Alzheimer's disease may be personalized based on their biological sex and genetic context.

### Software Tools
GWAS: `PLINK`, Meta-Analyses: `GWAMA`, SNP-Heritability: `GCTA`, Gene-Set Analyses: `MAGMA`, Genetic Correlation: `GNOVA` (also see [here](https://github.com/qlu-lab/GNOVA-2.0))

### Acknowledgement
Genetic, biomarker, neuropathology, and cognitive data from this study was obtained from the following cohorts: Anti-Amyloid Treatment in Asymptomatic Alzheimer (A4), Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), Adult Changes in Thought (ACT), and Religious Orders Study/Memory and Aging Project (ROS/MAP). 

For cognitive resilience phenotype model creation and validation, please see these two papers from our group: [Dumitrescu et al., 2020](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaa209) and [Hohman et al., 2016](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000003397).

### Citation
Please cite the following papers:

Eissman JM, Dumitrescu L, Mahoney ER, Smith AN, Mukherjee S, Lee ML, Scollard P, Choi SE, Bush WS, Engelman CD, Lu Q, Fardo DW, Trittschuh EH, Mez J, Kaczorowski CC, Hernandez Saucedo H, Widaman KF, Buckley RF, Properzi MJ, Mormino EC, Yang HS, Harrison TM, Hedden T, Nho K, Andrews SJ, Tommet D, Hadad N, Sanders RE, Ruderfer DM, Gifford KA, Zhong X, Raghavan NS, Vardarajan BN; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI); Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC); A4 Study Team; Pericak-Vance MA, Farrer LA, Wang LS, Cruchaga C, Schellenberg GD, Cox NJ, Haines JL, Keene CD, Saykin AJ, Larson EB, Sperling RA, Mayeux R, Cuccaro ML, Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Crane PK, Jefferson AL, Hohman TJ. Sex differences in the genetic architecture of cognitive resilience to Alzheimer's disease. Brain. 2022 Jul 29;145(7):2541-2554. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac17. PMID: 35552371; PMCID: PMC9337804.

Dumitrescu L, Mahoney ER, Mukherjee S, Lee ML, Bush WS, Engelman CD, Lu Q, Fardo DW, Trittschuh EH, Mez J, Kaczorowski C, Hernandez Saucedo H, Widaman KF, Buckley R, Properzi M, Mormino E, Yang HS, Harrison T, Hedden T, Nho K, Andrews SJ, Tommet D, Hadad N, Sanders RE, Ruderfer DM, Gifford KA, Moore AM, Cambronero F, Zhong X, Raghavan NS, Vardarajan B; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI); Alzheimer’s Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC), A4 Study Team; Pericak-Vance MA, Farrer LA, Wang LS, Cruchaga C, Schellenberg G, Cox NJ, Haines JL, Keene CD, Saykin AJ, Larson EB, Sperling RA, Mayeux R, Bennett DA, Schneider JA, Crane PK, Jefferson AL, Hohman TJ. Genetic variants and functional pathways associated with resilience to Alzheimer's disease. Brain. 2020 Aug 1;143(8):2561-2575. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaa209. PMID: 32844198; PMCID: PMC7447518.

Hohman TJ, McLaren DG, Mormino EC, Gifford KA, Libon DJ, Jefferson AL; Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Asymptomatic Alzheimer disease: Defining resilience. Neurology. 2016 Dec 6;87(23):2443-2450. doi: https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000003397. Epub 2016 Nov 4. PMID: 27815399; PMCID: PMC5177674.

### Contact
For questions, comments, or data inquiries, please email corresponding author, Timothy Hohman, Ph.D. at timothy.j.hohman@vumc.org.
